Chapter 8
Perceiving Motion
Perceiving Motion



Functions of Movement Perception
Survival in the environment
Predators use movement of prey as a primary means of location in hunting.
Attentional capture: motion attracts attention to the moving object.
Thus, if prey remains motionless, it is less likely to be noticed.
Akinetopsia: blindness to motion


Functions of Movement Perception (cont'd.)



Functions of Movement Perception (cont'd.)



Functions of Movement Perception (cont'd.)



Studying Motion Perception
Real motion: an object is physically moving
Illusory motion
Apparent movement: stationary stimuli are presented in slightly different locations
Basis of movement in movies and TV
Induced motion: movement of one object results in the perception of movement in another object.

Studying Motion Perception (cont'd.)


Studying Motion Perception (cont'd.)
Motion aftereffect
Observer looks at movement of object for 30 to 60 seconds.
Then, observer looks at a stationary object.
Movement appears to occur in the opposite direction from the original movement.
The waterfall illusion is an example of this.


Studying Motion Perception (cont'd.)




Comparison of Real and Apparent Motion
Experiment by Larsen et al.
Participant is scanned by an fMRI while viewing three displays.
Control condition: two dots in different positions are flashed simultaneously.
Real motion: a small dot is moved back and forth.
Apparent motion: dots are flashed so they appear to move.
Comparison of Real and Apparent Motion (cont'd.)
Results:
Control condition: each dot activated a separate area of visual cortex.
Apparent and real motion: activation of visual cortex from both sets of stimuli was similar.
Thus, the perception of motion in both cases is related to the same brain mechanism.

Comparison of Real and Apparent Motion (cont'd.)



What We Want to Explain
An object moves, and the observer is stationary.
Movement creates an image that moves on the observer’s retina.
An object moves, and the observer follows the object with his or her eyes.
Movement is tracked so that the image is stationary on the retina.
What We Want to Explain (cont'd.)
An observer moves through a stationary environment.
Image of environment moves across retina but environment is perceived as stationary.
What mechanism explains all three situations?
What We Want to Explain (cont'd.)


What We Want to Explain (cont'd.)


What We Want to Explain (cont'd.)


What We Want to Explain (cont'd.)


Motion Perception: Information in the Environment
Ecological approach (Gibson)
Information is directly available in the environment for perception.
Optic array: structure created by surfaces, textures, and contours, which change as the observer moves through the environment.
Motion Perception: Information in the Environment (cont'd.)
Local disturbance in the optic array
Objects relative to background such that it is covered and uncovered
Global optic flow
Overall movement of optic array
Indicates that observer is moving and not the environment
Motion Perception: Retina/Eye Information
Reichardt detectors are neurons that fire to movement in one direction.
Output unit
Delay unit
Motion Perception: Retina/Eye Information (cont'd.)


Motion Perception: Retina/Eye Information (cont'd.)
Corollary discharge theory: movement perception depends on three signals.
Image displacement signal (IDS): movement of image stimulating receptors across the retina
Motor signal (MS): signal sent to eyes to move eye muscles
Corollary discharge signal (CDS): split from the motor signal

Motion Perception: Retina/Eye Information (cont'd.)
Movement is perceived when comparator receives input from:
Corollary discharge signal
Image displacement signal
Movement is not perceived when comparator receives input from:
Both corollary discharge and image displacement signals at the same time
Motion Perception: Retina/Eye Information (cont'd.)


Motion Perception: Retina/Eye Information (cont'd.)


Behavioral Evidence for Corollary Discharge Theory


Behavioral Evidence for Corollary Discharge Theory (cont'd.)


Physiological Evidence for Corollary Discharge Theory
Damage to the medial superior temporal area in humans leads to perception of movement of stationary environment with movement of eyes.
Real-movement neurons found in monkeys that respond only when a stimulus moves and do not respond when eyes move.
Physiological Evidence for Corollary Discharge Theory (cont'd.)


Motion Perception in the Brain
Perception of motion begins in the striate cortex, the region of the occipital lobe where information from the retinas first reaches the cortex.
Neurons on the striate cortex respond to movement of the ends of objects.
Middle temporal (MT) area
Motion Perception in the Brain (cont'd.)
Firing and coherence experiment by Newsome et al.
Coherence of movement of dot patterns was varied.
Monkeys were taught to judge direction of dot movement and measurements were taken from MT neurons.
Results showed that as coherence of dot movement increased, so did the firing of the MT neurons and the judgment of movement accuracy.
Motion Perception in the Brain (cont'd.)


Motion Perception in the Brain (cont'd.)
Lesioning experiment by Newsome and Paré
Normal monkeys can detect motion with coherence of 1 or 2%.
Monkeys with lesions in MT cortex cannot detect motion until the coherence is 10 to 20%.
Motion Perception in the Brain (cont'd.)


Effect of Lesioning, Deactivating, and Stimulating
Microstimulation experiment by Movshon and Newsome
Monkey trained to indicate direction of fields of moving dots.
Neurons in MT cortex that respond to specific direction were activated.
Experimenter used microstimulation to activate different direction sensitive neurons.
Monkey shifted judgment to the artificially stimulated direction.

Effect of Lesioning, Deactivating, and Stimulating (cont'd.)



Motion from a Single Neuron’s Point of View
Complex cortical cells respond preferentially to an oriented bar moving in a specific direction.
Aperture problem: observation of small portion of larger stimulus leads to misleading information about direction of movement.
Activity of a single complex cell does not provide accurate information about direction of movement.
Motion from a Single Neuron’s Point of View (cont'd.)


Motion from a Single Neuron’s Point of View (cont'd.)


Solving the Aperture Problem
Aperture problem:
Viewing only a small portion of a larger stimulus can result in misleading information about the direction in which the stimulus is moving.

Solving the Aperture Problem (cont'd.)




Motion and the Human Body
Apparent motion of the body
Biological motion: movement of person or other living organism
Point-light walker stimulus: biological motion is made by placing lights in specific places on a person.
Structure-from-motion takes place with point-light walkers.
Neurological studies show biological motion is processed by STS and FFA.
Motion and the Human Body (cont'd.)


Motion and the Human Body (cont'd.)
Grossman et al.
Participants viewed point-light stimuli for activities.
The task was to determine whether motion was biological or scrambled.
Noise was added to dots so they could only achieve 71% accuracy.
Transcranial magnetic stimulation applied to STS caused a decrease in the ability to detect biological motion.
Motion and the Human Body (cont'd.)



Motion and the Human Body (cont'd.)



Motion and the Human Body (cont'd.)



Motion Responses to Still Pictures
Implied motion are still pictures that depict an action that involves motion.
Representational momentum: observers show that the implied motion is carried out in the observer’s mind.

Motion Responses to Still Pictures (cont'd.)



Motion Responses to Still Pictures (cont'd.)
Experiment by Kourtzi and Kanwisher
fMRI response was measured in MT and MST to pictures with:
Implied motion
No-implied motion
At rest
Houses
Results showed areas of brain responsible for motion fire in response to pictures of implied motion.
Motion Responses to Still Pictures (cont'd.)



Motion Preference Amongst Newborn Babies
Perception of biological motion may not depend on visual experience.
Vallortigara and his coworkers (2005) examined the preferences of newly hatched chicks for different types of motion.

 
